Lessons from Ukraine, Pt. 1: The Capital of the End of the World

{d}Preface: This is part one of a series of blog posts where I talk
about my experience visiting Kyiv, the capital of Ukraine, from
August 21-23. The situation in Kyiv is dynamic as always, and
this is written from my experience as it happened. Things may
have changed since!{/d}

{g}LESSON 0: The end of the world is served by regional rail.{/g}

  I found myself sitting at my desk one day in July, sometime
around the 14th, poking around the webpage of Ukrzaliznytsia -
the Ukrainian Railways corporation. I couldn't really tell you
why I first got the urge to - perhaps some part nerdy curiosity,
some part subconsciously actually thinking about it. What I can
say is that I'd been listening a lot to Emperor X's album
"Unified Field" recorded in various studios in Ukraine over the
last couple years and it'd certainly left me with a lot of
questions about the place. I already had a Europe trip vaguely
planned for mid-August to burn some airline miles, so it wasn't
an impossibility.

  Flipping through the website would be, unbeknownst to me, one
of the many surreal yet tiny moments that would lead to me
actually visiting the place. On the site - which was extremely
clean, Amtrak take notes - it surprised me a little bit to find
out that there wasn't really anything stopping me from just...
booking a train to Kyiv. I had to verify my passport to do so,
sure, but that was really it. Beyond that, tickets released 20
days before the train actually departed, and never really cost
more than $25, so I just had to be a little patient. They were
even refundable until day of, so, what was there to lose?

  Bored at my desk, I got my passport and decided to do the
verification for the hell of it. The check involved taking a
photo of it side by side with my face, as well as writing out a
4-digit PIN onto actual paper to make sure I was a real person.
I wrote down the number on my notebook, submitted the form, and
left the notebook on my counter and didn't think much of it.
That was, until my roommate asked me why my notebook had a page
with a giant scrawled number and nothing else.

  I replied sort of matter-of-factly that I was thinking about
visiting Ukraine - the first time I'd actually said the words. I
got the series of questions and comments I'd learn would become
standard, the "holy shit, that's cool" leading to "wait, but
why" leading to the three words I'd hear another hundred times:
"hey, don't die." It was decently surreal to hear that for
something I'd just done with a couple clicks on my laptop -
something that wasn't binding, something that I didn't know if I
even had any intent on following through on.

  A few hours later, an email hit my inbox.

  "Welcome to JSC Ukrainian Railways!
  Your account has been successfully verified. We look forward
to welcoming you to Ukraine!"

  Attached to it, beyond the approval information, was a
promotion in clean, plain English for the Iron Family,
Ukrzaliznytsia's charity for the railway workers. "They keep
Ukraine moving under fire - stand with them!"

--- 

  I spent the next few days planning out the rest of the Europe
trip. I had friends I wanted to see in the Netherlands, Germany,
and the UK, and the loose skeleton of a trip that'd start in
Amsterdam and end flying home from Frankfurt began to take
shape. But I'd kept the middle of the trip open - on the so-far
off chance I'd actually decide to go to Kyiv. I told myself it
was far from certain, but kept checking the UZ website every so
often, flipping through the pages of how the war was treating
them, how things were going, and always feeling a bit of an
emotional pull about it.

  That changed on July 25.

  Emperor X, who I'd come to know a lot better soon by his name,
Chad Matheny, was playing the last show of his tour for Unified
Field in my home of LA. Chad's shows are not that big - two
hundred people at the absolute most, and Chad makes a point of
sitting around after the show to talk to everyone. We'd talked
before at a show last October, and it was a conversation I'd
very much taken to heart. After introducing myself, and my
background in aerospace policy and as a quite left-leaning
person working on the skirts of the defense industry, Chad asked
me one of the most important questions of my life:

  "Do you believe in a just war?"

  I didn't have a direct answer then and there, but I had a lot
of thoughts given that our political side of the aisle had
largely ceded any interest in ever engaging with war. Not
necessarily pacifism, but instead a hands-over-ears refusal to
engage with the problem. Chad and I bonded a bit over our
frustration about this, and I think it was where I had first
started thinking about Ukraine nearly a year ago in this
context.

  And so, after his show, I walked up to Chad once more.

  "I don't know if you remember me, but I was that girl that
worked in space policy you chatted for an hour with at the last
LA show. You asked me if I believed in a just war?"

  Chad immediately remembered me. Without missing a beat: "Well,
do you have an answer?"

  "No, not yet." He looked a little dismayed, at least I
thought. "But I was thinking about going to Ukraine about it."

  "Wait, seriously?" I watched him immediately light up, almost
completely snapping out of the standard artist-at-merch-table
type of personality. Yes - I said - or at least that I was
thinking about it, and that I was already going to be in Europe
to some extent around mid-late August.

  "I'm playing two shows in Kyiv, on the 20th and the 22nd. I
really want you to come and talk there, they'll love you. You
should totally do it."

  "I'm in."

---

  We spent much of the rest of that night chatting just like we
did last time, at a bar by the venue, all as I was slowly
processing what I'd actually just at least verbally, softly,
committed myself to. But for the first time, the "don't die" was
replaced by eager "yes"-es from people that'd been there before
- from Chad himself, who'd been touring from Odessa to Kharkiv
and was about to do it again. Chad somewhat drunkenly tried to
teach me my first words of Ukrainian - privit for hello, dyakuyu
for thank you, and slowly it felt more and more and more real,
until we finally shared real contact information this time and
parted ways around 1:00 am. Chad had another show near-ish to LA
the next day, but after that, he'd be back off to Europe too.

  "Well, either I'll see you tomorrow, or..."

  "or see you in Ukraine," Chad left me with.

  "Yeah. See you in Ukraine!"

---


  The next couple weeks were a long, sequential series of small
actions that slowly marched me a little closer. I'd assembled
the rest of the Europe trip - a quick stop in NYC first, then
friends in Amsterdam and Cardiff, and a Ryanair hop from Bristol
to Krakow on credit I already had laying around.

  Krakow was not an accident. Przemysl, four hours east, was one
of very few places where the broad-gauge Ukrainian rail network
directly connected to the European standard-gauge system at a
single station, making Krakow the closest you could fly to get
into Ukraine. Everything else I had booked was refundable,
making the trip still feel like a series of options I could take
to end up in Kyiv rather than a commitment. Which made it almost
too easy to not think about what I was assembling.

  Eventually, the 31st of July rolled around, and with it,
bookings for the 20th on UZ. I waited on my laptop late in the
evening until 11 p.m. sharp - exactly when tickets became
available in the morning in Ukraine. Like clockwork, all of the
trains had appeared, including the one I wanted:

  THURSDAY, AUGUST 20 -
  TRAIN 052K: Przemysl 22:30 - Kyiv-Pasazhyrskyi 09:02
  UAH 2582.21 / $57.73 USD 

  Most long-distance trains in Ukraine are some form of sleeper
train - and beds across the border are extremely lucrative, as
they are relatively cheap and far preferable to crossing via bus
or non-sleeper trains. Beds, therefore, sell out extremely
quickly - so quickly that the UZ interface had been designed to
show real time (to the second!) availability of beds on the
trains. The moment I clicked on 052K, the one I wanted, I could
quite literally see the reservations disappearing in seconds. I
scrambled to click one - got unlucky the first couple attempts -
then finally secured one and made it to the payment screen.

  A 15-minute timer showed up at the top of the screen. I'd
successfully reserved my bed. I paid - with Apple Pay of all
things! - and before I knew it, I was ticketed. A new email
showed up.

------------------------------------
SUBJECT: Your ticket on Train 052K

"Ukrainian Railways welcomes you!
Your ticket is attached. Thank you for traveling with Ukrainian
Railways.

Train: 052K Przemysl - Kyiv-Pasazhyrskyi

Departure: Przemysl
           Thursday, August 20, 22:30

Arrival:   Kyiv-Pasazhyrskyi
           Friday, August 21, 09:02

Passenger: Lavie Ohana
           Car 7, Seat 35

Please note that passenger document checks are more rigorous
now. Don't forget to provide your passport."
------------------------------------

  And so, everything fell into place. A few instances of the
same "don't die" conversation later, the days just... simply
marched toward the 20th. I flew to Amsterdam by the 13th, made
my next stop in Cardiff to see an old friend (in which I got
terribly sick, and burned all of my time there getting better),
and found myself on a flight to Krakow on August 20th.

  I think that was the moment that going to Kyiv first finally
felt... real. That like, here I was in Krakow, with nothing left
to do but get on the train to the border and accept. I had had
the option to simply not go the entire time, but I continued to
march toward it, and I had then suddenly come to the realization
that I would be spending tonight asleep on a train moving
through the west of Ukraine, hoping no drone would attempt to
attack it on the way.

  And yet somehow, it still didn't fully click? Krakow was
terribly hot, but also busy and wonderful in its own right, and
all of these things took up much of my mental space in the time
I was there. Even getting on the train to Przemysl, I spent much
of the first couple hours staring at Krakow give way to its
suburbs, then to other Polish cities, but slowly and slowly the
train grew quieter. Once we had passed Rzeszow, I realized I was
completely alone in my train car.

  Around 7:30, we'd finally pulled into Przemysl. Dead silent.
Absolutely nothing like the nearly manic, bustling vibe of
Krakow's main station. Instead, I found myself almost completely
alone on the platform,  in some Polish border town that had
become one of very few gateways to Kyiv, and I made my way to
the waiting room, where for the first time, I got a taste of
what was about to come:

  |-------------------------------------------|
  | Odjazdy (Departures)                19:32 |
  |-------------------------------------------|
  | Time  | Train   | Destination       | Pl. |
  |-------|---------|-------------------|-----|
  | 19:46 | R 30468 | Rzeszow Gl.       | 3   | 
  | 20:05 | IC33172 | Ustka             | 2   |
  | 21:10 | RJ34000 | Praha hln         | 2   |
  | 21:15 | R 30482 | Przeworsk         | 2   | 
  | 22:30 | UZ 052  | Kyiv-Pasazhyrskyi | 5   |
  | 23:49 | UZ 716  | Kyiv-Pasazhyrskyi | 5   |
  |-------------------------------------------|

  T- 3 hours, huh? It was, if anything, a good amount of time to
sit and process the events that were about to unfold. Especially
in conjunction with the eerie silence of Przemysl. I wandered
the halls of the station - much larger than I'd expected, and
all full with people silently waiting for their turn, before
finding a cafe next to the station that happened to still be
open. I managed to get around the language barrier just enough
to ask for a cup of tea, and for the first time in a while, sat
down and opened my laptop.

  There was, actually, one last bit of paperwork left that I'd
forgotten to do. There are various sites that will sell you
weirdly cheap insurance packages for Ukraine - like, 3 EUR - and
some people had remarked that they'd been asked for proof of
insurance at the border before. I wasn't sure, and didn't feel
like finidng out the hard way, so I spent my last hour in Poland
frantically trying to get any of these sites to actually let me
buy an insurance package. Just when I finally got it through, my
phone lit up right on time at 20:30 with a ping from the
Ukrainian Railways app:

-- 2 hours to departure, Train 052K
   Please head to platform 5.

  I walked over - Platform 5, the international one, was on the
other side of the station, in its own caged-off enclave. Leading
to it was a strangely nondescript office building holding the EU
exit checkpoint, with one line for non-EU/EES nations (including
Ukrainians) and a nearly empty line for EU and the nations
eligible for the European Entry/Exit System, which included the
USA and therefore myself. A Polish guard scanned my fingerprints
and my passport, handed me the passport back, and I walked
through a door to a little caged off outdoor area with not
nearly enough seats. I found my way to a corner, sat down on the
stone-tiled platform floor, and finally began to actually
process what on Earth I'd gotten myself into.

  Looking around the families around me - almost entirely women
and their children, men over 22 aren't allowed to leave Ukraine
without a very good reason - it started to hit that I had gotten
myself 90% of the way to the capital of the end of the world
without doing anything special whatsoever. I didn't sign any
special paperwork, I didn't have to make any crazy arrangements,
if anything the experience was smoother than many trips I'd
booked domestically back in the States. And yet, here I was,
sitting on a Soviet-gauge platform, waiting for...

  A lumbering train slowly pulls into the platform, freshly
painted blue and with the UZ "Y3" logo and the Ukrainian trident
shield adorned on its side. A station worker moves aside the
fence gate blocking the waiting area away, and everyone
immediately gets up and starts moving down the platform to find
their spot on the train. Each car had an amber display,
translated from Ukrainian:

  -----------------
  | TRAIN 52/51   |
  | PRZEMYSL-KYIV |
  | 6<-  CAR  ->8 |
  |       7       |
  -----------------

  I found car 7, my car, and waited outside the door with the
same families, all speaking Ukrainian or other languages I could
hardly understand. I saw everyone holding their passports - and
got mine out too, finding that I was the only American and
plausibly the only foreigner at all on the train. We waited for
20 minutes in which not much really happened - everyone milling
around killing time on their phones, staring at the train -
which I'd noticed had a smiley face drawn into the dust on it -
and that was really it. Eventually, the conductor - or
"provodnyk" as I'd learn - finally opened the door. Everyone's
ticket and passport got checked, and mine got me my first
up-down "America?" stare I'd come to get very used to.

  Ukrainian sleeper cars are extremely utilitarian. There are a
few classes - I was in a "coupe," which is a train composed of
rooms carrying 4 passengers - two lower bunks, two upper bunks.
Entering my room, I found the bedsheets and other linens all
neatly folded on the top bunk for me to put together, standard
practice. I got mostly through putting mine together without
stumbling through any conversation until I found out that
seemingly, I'd taken someone else's seat. Luckily, I didn't have
to trip over too much Ukrainian (largely "pryvit... ya s
ameryky... vy hovoryte anhilyskoyu" - "Hi, I'm American, do you
speak English") before they informed me they did actually speak
pretty solid English.

  Turns out - there are two numbering systems on the train cars:
EU regulations and Ukrainian regulations, solely for these
trains that actually cross the border. I had followed the
EU-specified "Seat 35" markers to a lower bunk (which I knew
wasn't quite right), when my upper bunk was actually 3 rooms
down. Whoops. At the very least, everyone involved was
incredibly kind about the ordeal.

  But, that small gaffe aside, I made my (correct) bed and laid
down, anxiously waiting for the train to move. There was, at
this point, no going back. Not much staring at the ceiling
later, we slowly got moving.

  It's hard to explain the actual physical feeling of laying
down in one of these old, ex-Soviet sleeper cars. People say
that broad gauge trains feel different - and while in reality
that's not completely true, *these* trains certainly did. After
criss-crossing Europe on its newest, smoothest intercity trains,
the Ukrainian cars could only be described as large, lumbering,
the kind of thing that sways back and forth and feels like it
moves the entire world with it as it does. The train slowly
settled into a rhythmic, deep, clack-clack-clack, the kind of
thing that felt like a machine pushing itself to life, all while
I laid in a top bunk that never quite settled.

  I watched my phone anxiously as the dot on the map slowly
crossed out and out of Przemysl, then out through Medyka, the
very last town before the border, where it seemed to slow for a
moment. But, we kept moving, and sooner rather than later that
dot on my map had crossed the line in the sand. We were, at
least physically, now in Ukraine, a thing I'd never imagined
myself saying a couple months ago.

  The train came to a stop soon after, at a poorly lit stop a
couple kilometers across the border, and all of the doors swung
open and the lights came up to their brightest, which was
certainly not pleasant. A bunch of Ukrainian border and security
guards came on to check everyone's passports - or rather, put
them all in a box to be checked outside. The guard asked me a
question in Ukrainian - I couldn't make sense of it, and sort of
panicked while pointing to my American passport and attempting
to stumble over the same "sorry"s and other couple words I
remembered.

  Lucky for me, the situation pretty quickly defused once he
connected the dots, and the guard turned to me largely now
looking surprised, simply asking "America?"

  I nodded yes, which seemed satisfactory enough for him. He
took my passport, along with the others in the train, and walked
off. The checks took longer than felt comfortable to be missing
my most important document - something like 20-30 minutes, in
which I could really only lay back down in the fully lit train
staring at the ceiling.

  Just when I was about to fall back asleep, the guard came
back. A couple "why are you visiting," (a friend, I replied) and
"where is your stuff" and some cursory searches of my bags
later, the guard seemed satisfied, and handed me back my stamped
passport. I was now officially in Ukraine.

  A few more minutes later, the train finally got moving and the
lights came back off, settling back into the swaying back and
forth and the ever-speeding-up clacking that finally felt like
we were really going somewhere now. I couldn't tell how fast - I
could hardly see out of the window from my bunk, and it was
quite dark out, but we were moving.

  I fell into a mental state somewhere between extremely light
sleep and vaguely attentive - even trying my best, I couldn't
stop myself from checking my phone and the Ukraine alert map
every so often, keeping an eye on what parts of the country were
lighting up, scrolling through the Telegram channels full of
alerts, and trying to rest however I could while giving myself
the lightest of assurances that a drone probably wasn't headed
our way. We reached Lviv around 3:30 am - the only real stop of
the journey, but only really marked by the sudden silence of the
train otherwise interrupted by platform announcements at the
Lviv station.

  By 7:00 am or so, I'd woken up to some sunlight peeking
through the train windows, somewhere halfway between Lviv and
Kyiv. We'd survived the night, clearly, and I steadied myself
enough to try to put myself together in the just-as-shaky train
bathroom, brushing my teeth and changing while trying to not get
thrown into the walls. We were running a bit late - I didn't
quite know how late, but from the looks of everyone around me,
we weren't close yet. I decided to take the chance to get a bit
more sleep.

---

  Waking up for the last time on the train, I looked at my phone
and saw that it was 9:15 am. But I also looked outside and saw
that the Ukrainian wilderness had given way to what looked like
a cityscape, and that the thin railway corridor we'd followed
had become a vast array of tracks, which seemed to give way to a
set of platforms. We were approaching Kyiv's central station.

  I frantically undid my bedsheets, folded them aside, and
grabbed my bags, not even finishing until the train had already
come to a complete stop. Stumbling out the door onto the
platform, it took a moment to sink in what I'd just done.

  A sign hung above me:

  |-------------------------------|
  |TRACK TIME  TRAIN ARRIVAL DEPT.|
  |  9   09:45 052    09:02   --  |
  |        PRZEMYSL - KYIV        |
  |-------------------------------|

  I dragged myself up the top of the staircase to the overpass,
and looked out onto the station and for the first time, Kyiv's
skyline.

  I'd made it to the capital of the end of the world.

  Now what?

{d}----------------------------------------------------------------{/d}

  Thanks for reading so far! This is part one of likely six
in this series of "Lessons from Ukraine" I'd like to write.
Don't worry, the next couple will actually talk about my time in
Kyiv and Ukraine as a whole - but for now, might as well share
how on earth I got there.

  And don't worry, I'm home safe, publishing this from some cafe
in downtown Los Angeles like I've always been.

  See ya around!

  - lavie